So now that we've talked
about asynchrony and now
we've talked a bit about the
completable futures framework,
let's kind of take a tour
through the history of Java
and start by
discussing something
known as Java futures.
And so what we're going to
do in this part of the lesson
is begin to explain how
Java futures provide
the foundation for the
completable futures
framework that's available
in later versions of Java.
And this is really kind of a
history lesson in some ways.
We'll also show you a
fun, human-known use
of Java futures, which I love to
use to explain these concepts.
I typically find I learn best if
I can sort of get an intuitive
analogy or a metaphor for some
abstruse computing concept.
It just makes me
feel a little better.
And I think I found
a really good one
to help make you understand
futures in a way you
can probably relate to--
perhaps all too well.
We'll also talk briefly
about the methods
in the future interface,
which, as you can see,
there are just a
handful of methods.
But they have some
interesting properties.
So let's start by talking
about a human-known use of Java
futures before I
start to bore you
with all the low-level
technical details.
So a future is
essentially a proxy
that represents the results of
some asynchronous computation
or asynchronous call.
So typically, what
happens is you initiate
some asynchronous call.
That call will then
go ahead and run
in some kind of
background thread
like a service thread, or
a pool thread, or whatnot.
And you get back a
future right away.
And the results of that
asynchronous computation
can only be obtained
through that future
after the asynchronous
computation completes.
So that's the basic model.
But what else kind
of looks like that?
Well, if you go to
fast food restaurants--
actually, if you go at
almost any restaurant that's
not a sit-down
restaurant where you're
waited on by a waiter,
what you'll end up with
is something that's a
great example of futures.
And it's just funny.
You typically don't
think about it this way.
But it's really what's going on.
So if you go into a
fast food restaurant--
let's say you go to a Wendy's.
Wendy's is my favorite
example because they
were kind of the ones to
pioneer this decades ago.
Back in the day, most fast food
restaurants-- say, McDonald's--
would pre-cook all their food.
So they'd ore-cook
a bunch of Big Macs.
They'd pre-cook
a bunch of fries.
They'd pre-pour a
bunch of drinks.
And when you went
into the restaurant,
you'd walk up to the counter.
You'd say, I want a Big
Mac with fries with a Coke.
And you would wait synchronously
at the cash register.
And the person would reach
back to the heat lamp,
pull out the Big Mac, pull out
the fries, pull out the Coke,
give it back you, take your
money, transaction done--
synchronously.
The problem was the food wasn't
really very tasty because it
had been sitting there in the
heat lamp warming for a while.
So Wendy's-- which was
another fast food restaurant--
came along and said, we've
got a better way to do this.
We're going to cook
your meal to-order.
So when you would
go into Wendy's, you
would go up to
the cash register.
You'd say, I want a Dave Thomas
burger, and some special fries,
and a drink.
And what they would
do is rather than make
you wait synchronously
at the cash register,
they would take your
order, take your money,
and give you a table
tent number which
looks like what you
see on the screen,
like a plastic number with
a tent-like form factor.
That's a future.
And then you would
take your future.
You would go sit down.
You might chat
with your friends.
Back in those days,
we didn't even
have phones to waste our
time with social media.
But you'd read the paper, maybe
you might talk to somebody.
You'd do something.
And then when your
food was cooked,
your future would be triggered.
So you could either
go pick it up
at the pickup window, which
is a polling-based approach.
Or they might bring it
out to your table, which
is a callback-based approach.
In either case, you
would get your result.
And the future was
the way that whoever
was running the restaurant
could deliver your food cooked
to-order to the right location.
So that's basically the idea.
And so the way to think about
this in the back of your mind
is that synchronous
communication is
like the old school
McDonald's way of doing things
where you pre-cash
and pre-cook and wait.
Whereas the Wendy's model
of preparing fast food
uses futures.
Nowadays, just to be
fair, McDonald's will also
cook your meals to
order, which means
they'll give you, typically,
a piece of paper with a number
on it.
And then you go redeem your
future when it's ready.
But back in the day,
it was different.
So hopefully, that will help you
understand a bit about futures
and how this works with
the computing models
we're about to talk about.
It's really the same thing,
just with computers and not
fast food restaurants.
So now that you know a bit
more about the metaphor
to help give you the
bigger-picture view,
let's start to talk about
the Java future API.
Futures were added
to Java 5, which
came out in the 2004 timeframe.
So it's been about
15 years or so.
And they were added to provide
asynchronous call support
to Java.
And basically, the way
this works is a Java future
provides you with
a bunch of methods
that can manage the
lifecycle of a task
after it's submitted
to run asynchronously,
typically in a thread pool.
So let's take a
look at an example
and see if we can kind of
make it all come together.
So the idea here is
we're going to have
somebody submit a task that
will run in a thread pool.
And what happens is that right
away when you submit the task,
you get a future
back immediately.
And you can then use that
future for various things
while the computation is
running in the background.
One thing you can
do with the future
is as a future owner is
you can test the future
to see if it's completed.
So you can say, are you done?
Yes or no.
You could also see if
you've been canceled.
And if you have
not been canceled,
you can choose to
cancel the future.
So you can say, have
I been canceled?
Is it canceled?
And if not, you can say, cancel.
So what that will
do is that will
go ahead and tell the
asynchronous computation
to stop running.
It will request the asynchronous
operation to stop running.
It'll interrupt it.
And then the result
will be ignored.
Now, as we all know,
if you watch the videos
on thread interrupts like a
computable object-oriented
programming course,
you know that these
are voluntary requests
for cancellation.
But the long and the short of
it is once you cancel a future,
there will be no value coming
back to you at any point.
And of course, the other
thing you can do with a future
is you can use it
to redeem the result
of the asynchronous computation.
So when an asynchronous
computation is done,
you can get the
result by calling get.
Now, if you end up calling
get and the future has not yet
been triggered because the
asynchronous operation hasn't
completed, then you can
block as we show here.
Or there is also a timed version
of this where you can either
return immediately by polling
if you give it a zero.
Or you can wait up to a
certain amount of time
to get a result back.